Tech note: A roundup of R tools for handling BibTeX (#668)
ropensci/roweb2: content/technotes/2020-05-07-rmd-citations/index.Rmd

---

> title: A roundup of R tools for handling BibTeX

Author: How could I miss that, sorry!

knitr::knit_hooks$set(
  plot = function(x, options) {
    hugoopts <- options$hugoopts
    paste0(
      "{{<figure src=",
      '"', x, '" ',
      if (!is.null(hugoopts)) {
        glue::glue_collapse(
          glue::glue('{names(hugoopts)}="{hugoopts}"'),
          sep = " "
        )
      },
      ">}}\n"
    )
  }
)

# knitr hook to use Hugo highlighting options
knitr::knit_hooks$set(
  source = function(x, options) {
  hlopts <- options$hlopts
    paste0(
      "```r ",
      if (!is.null(hlopts)) {
      paste0("{",
        glue::glue_collapse(
          glue::glue('{names(hlopts)}={hlopts}'),
          sep = ","
        ), "}"
        )
      },
      "\n", glue::glue_collapse(x, sep = "\n"), "\n```\n"
    )
  }
)
```

Our website is based on Markdown content rendered with Hugo.
Markdown content is in some cases knit from R Markdown, but with [less functionality than if one rendered R Markdown to html as in the blogdown default](https://bookdown.org/yihui/blogdown/output-format.html).
In particular, we cannot use the usual BibTex + CSL + Pandoc-citeproc [dance](https://github.com/rstudio/distill/issues/45) to handle a bibliography.

> Thankfully, using the rOpenSci package RefManageR, we can still make our own bibliography building from a BibTeX file without formatting references by hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thankfully, using the rOpenSci package RefManageR, we can still make our own bibliography from a BibTeX file without formatting references by hand.
```

* references a bibliography style in the document YAML metadata, with entries such as the one below for R,

```bibtex
  @Manual{my-citation-key-for-r,
    title = {R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing},
    author = {{R Core Team}},
    organization = {R Foundation for Statistical Computing},
    address = {Vienna, Austria},
    year = {2020},
    url = {https://www.R-project.org/},
  }
```

* inserts citations using their key, e.g. `@my-citation-key-for-r` for the entry above,

* and optionally uses CSL to control the look of the references list; and a bookdown output format to have the bibliography placed somewhere else than the end.

#### Handy R packages for references: citr and knitcitations

Some R tools out there simplify part of the workflow:

* [citr](https://github.com/crsh/citr) by [Frederik Aust](https://github.com/crsh) provides an RStudio add-in to search for references in a .bib file, inserting the key in the document (mimicking tools you could find in Microsoft Word);

> * [knitcitations](https://github.com/cboettig/knitcitations) by [Carl Boettiger](/author/carl-boettiger) allows you to not only use the keys, but also DOIs and URLs to cite a paper. E.g. `citet("10.1098/rspb.2013.1372")` will create a citation to `@Boettiger_2013` after querying the web; and `write.bibtex(file = "references.bib")` will allow you to cache entries in a bibliography file.

Author: Cool package, right? :smile_cat:

In most cases, authors are only citing a few references, so that is fine.
However, sometimes authors would like to use an existing .bib file, that they might have e.g. exported from Zotero.

Thankfully, using RefManageR, we can provide a workflow for adding citations from a bib file, by creating functions similar to knitcitations' functions.

We are using the .bib file below,

```{r, results="asis", echo = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
glue::glue_collapse(
  c("```bibtex",
    readLines("refs.bib"),
    "```"),
  sep = "\n")
```

#### Create a bibliography object

We'll start by creating a `BibEntry` object by calling `RefManageR::ReadBib()`: 

```{r readbib}
mybib <- RefManageR::ReadBib("refs.bib", check = FALSE) 
mybib
class(mybib)
```

#### Create and use a cite function

Then in another chunk, we'll create a function creating the citations in the format we need it to have it appear as a footnote: `[^key]`.

```{r createf}
cite <- function(key, bib = mybib) {
  # create a silent reference so RefManageR
  # knows we've used this entry
  RefManageR::NoCite(bib, key)
  # create the string we need in the Markdown document
  paste0("[^", key, "]")
}
```

> From the three entries of the BibTeX file, let us cite two of them, what a nice package`r cite("refmanager")` built on top of R`r cite("my-citation-key-for-r")` (we wrote ` cite("refmanager")` and `cite("my-citation-key-for-r")` as inline code).

Author: That's clever!

#### Print the references list

Finally, for the bibliography to appear, we need to add a call to `RefManageR::PrintBibliography()`, after defining our own bibstyle. 

> We need each entry to appear in the Markdown file as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, each entry will appear in the Markdown file as
```

```
[^mykey]: <APA string>
```

> To get the first part right, we use the `fmtPrefix` of `tools::bibstyle()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the first part (`[^mykey]`), we use the `fmtPrefix` of `tools::bibstyle()`.
```

In the following examples, we'll use the .bib file below,

```{r, results="asis", echo = FALSE, warning = FALSE}
glue::glue_collapse(
  c("```bibtex",
    readLines("refs.bib"),
    "```"),
  sep = "\n")
```

#### Create a bibliography object

We'll start by creating a `BibEntry` object by calling `RefManageR::ReadBib()`: 

```{r readbib}
mybib <- RefManageR::ReadBib("refs.bib", check = FALSE) 
mybib
class(mybib)
```

#### Create and use a cite function

Then in another R code chunk, we'll create a function which writes the citations in the format we want. Our citation format is a footnote: `[^key]`.

```{r createf}
cite <- function(key, bib = mybib) {
  # create a silent reference so RefManageR
  # knows we've used this entry
  RefManageR::NoCite(bib, key)
  # create the string we need in the Markdown document
  paste0("[^", key, "]")
}
```

From the three entries in the BibTeX file, let us cite two of them:

"what a nice package&#96;r cite("refmanager")&#96; built on top of R&#96;r cite("my-citation-key-for-r")&#96;"

when rendered becomes: 

"what a nice package`r cite("refmanager")` built on top of R`r cite("my-citation-key-for-r")`".

> 

Reviewer: This looks a little funny in the preview, what about something like this (I'm putting this in as actual text, not a suggestion, because with all the code blocks it's really hard to make it look right. The last example would be the same as the second last, just outside of a code block so the footnotes would render correctly:

From the three entries in the BibTeX file, let us cite two of them:

In the Rmd file we write:
```
what a nice package`r cite("refmanager")` built on top of R`r cite("my-citation-key-for-r")`.
```

Which when knit, becomes this in the md file:

```
what a nice package[^refmanager] built on top of R[^my-citation-key-for-r].
```

Which when rendered by Hugo, becomes this in the html file:

what a nice package[^refmanager] built on top of R[^refmanager].

Author: right, you mean adding the Markdown result as an intermediary step?

Reviewer: Yes, and having the first two steps presented as code blocks, and the final step as regular html text

Author: Ok, thanks! I think it looks better now. I could not make the line break before the last step work so I removed it. :sob:

Reviewer: Looks great!

Author: :relieved: (these were good suggestions but escaping things is hard :sweat_smile: )

Reviewer: I enjoyed "escape escaping hell" :grin:
